[mkdocs] docs: add query balance tutorial (#1751)
symbol/symbol: mkdocs/pages/en/devbook/accounts/query-balance.md

---
title: Query Account Balance
---

# Querying an Account Balance

> Accounts on Symbol can hold <mosaics:> (fungible tokens), including the native currency <XYM:>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Accounts:|Accounts> on Symbol can hold <mosaics:> (fungible tokens), including the native currency <XYM:>.
```

I have an issue where links starting with capitals are lowercased, so we need to provide the link string and the display string 😓

> This tutorial shows how to query an account's mosaic balances and format them with decimal places and friendly names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial shows how to query an account's mosaic balances and display them with the appropriate number of
decimal places.
If the <mosaic ID:> has a linked <namespace:>, it is also retrieved and displayed as the mosaic's friendly name.
```

To use the same names we used in the Textbook.

## Prerequisites

> This tutorial uses the Symbol REST API without requiring an SDK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial uses the [Symbol REST API](../reference/rest/symbol.md) without requiring an SDK.
```

You only need a way to make HTTP requests.

## Full Code

{% import 'tutorial.jinja2' as tutorial with context %}

{{ tutorial.code_full('devbook/accounts/query-balance', ['py', 'js']) }}

> The snippet uses the `NODE_URL` environment variable to configure the Symbol API node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The snippet uses the `NODE_URL` environment variable to set the Symbol API node.
```

> If no value is provided, it defaults to `https://001-sai-dual.symboltest.net:3001`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If no value is provided, a default one is used.
```

Easier to maintain, and matches the other tutorials.

> It defines the following functions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tutorial defines the following functions:
```

* `get_account_info()`: Fetches account state by address or public key.
* `get_mosaic_names()`: Fetches namespace aliases for mosaics.
* `get_mosaics_info()`: Fetches properties for multiple mosaics in a single request.

> * `format_amount()`: Formats amounts with decimal places.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `get_account_info()`: Fetches <account:> state by address or public key.
* `get_mosaic_names()`: Fetches <namespace:> aliases for mosaics.
* `get_mosaics_info()`: Fetches properties for multiple <mosaics:> in a single request.
* `format_amount()`: Formats amounts with the appropriate number of decimal places, according to their <divisibility:>.
```

I like to provide links to the relevant topics sooner in the tutorial, rather than later.

## Code Explanation

### Fetching Account Information

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:10:23', 'js:6:17']) }}

The <get:/accounts/{accountId}> endpoint retrieves the state of an account, including all the mosaics it holds.

You can query an account using either its <address:> or its <public key:>.

### Fetching Mosaic Names

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:26:50', 'js:19:42']) }}

> Mosaics are identified by 64-bit numeric IDs, which can be hard to read and remember.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mosaics are identified by 64-bit numeric <Mosaic ID:|IDs>, which can be hard to read and remember.
```

To improve usability, mosaics can be linked to human-readable <namespace:> aliases.

The <post:/namespaces/mosaic/names> endpoint accepts multiple mosaic IDs and returns any namespace names that are
currently linked to them.
If a mosaic has no linked namespace, it will not appear in the response.

A mosaic can have multiple namespace aliases (different namespaces can link to the same mosaic).
When this happens, the code displays all aliases separated by commas.

### Fetching Mosaic Properties

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:53:77', 'js:44:67']) }}

To format mosaic balances correctly, the snippet fetches their properties from the network.
The key property required is <divisibility:>, which defines how many decimal places a mosaic supports.

For example, a mosaic with divisibility 6 stores amounts as integers representing millionths of a unit,
so an atomic value of `1_000_000` equals `1.000000` when formatted.

> A mosaic with divisibility 0 represents indivisible units (whole numbers only).

Reviewer: This is a good explanation, but it's already in the Textbook and I don't want to have to maintain two versions.
This is what the <divisibility:> link is for!

You can remove this paragraph.

You can retrieve mosaic properties using the <get:/mosaics/{mosaicId}> endpoint for individual mosaics.
The option used in this snippet is the <post:/mosaics> endpoint, which accepts multiple mosaic IDs in a single request
and returns detailed information about each mosaic, including its divisibility.

### Formatting Amounts

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:80:95', 'js:69:86']) }}

> This utility function converts atomic amounts into human-friendly representations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This utility function converts _atomic_ amounts into human-friendly representations:
```

Since this is now the first time we use the word _atomic_, make it clear it's a new word.

* **Atomic amount:** The raw value stored on the blockchain, expressed as an integer.
* **Formatted amount:** The display format with decimal places determined by the mosaic's divisibility.

The formatting splits the atomic amount into whole and fractional parts by dividing and taking the remainder
with respect to \(10^{\text{divisibility}}\).
The fractional part is then zero-padded to ensure it always displays the correct number of decimal places.

### Putting It All Together

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:98:141', 'js:88:134']) }}

The main code reads the `ADDRESS` environment variable to determine which account to query.

> If no value is provided, it uses a predefined sample address.

Reviewer: We've been calling it _default_ instead of _predefined_ in the other tutorials.
